##comit: A public service application on the blockchain 

###What is blockchain?
While “the blockchain” is commonly portrayed as a singular entity, it is in fact the integration of numerous technologies- consensus engies, hashing algorithms, security protocols, application state structures, and P2P networks. The blockchain has several manifestations, the most well known being Bitcoin. Important still, blockchain means different things to different people, and individuals and organizations have disparate ideas regarding how blockchains should be implemented and what purposes they should serve. Despite the range of opinions, many parties see value in existing and future applications of the blockchain across various industries. Blockchain technology has already made a large footprint in the financial sector with the abundance of cryptocurrencies pervading major banks and institutions while influencing how people across the world manage their personal finances. 

In theory, the blockchain provides an immutable ledger of transactions, be it financial transactions, votes, messages- which is replicated across a network of machines. Why is this significant? Well, it’s really hard for a bunch of computers that are not running on a single server system to agree on what the entries in the ledger should be if they are all trying to listen and talk to it at the same time. Think about the ridiculous hypothetical situation of a hundred-person conference call. The participants work at the same company but in different, geographically-separated branches. Each branch has its own meetings where coworkers discuss projects but every now and then there is a company-wide conference call where each branch updates the others on its developments. Unless there were well-defined rules about who should talk when, and those rules were carefully followed, it would be really difficult to have coherent and meaningful inter-branch conversation (the rules need not be explicity written or spoken but understood by the parties involved). With nodes, or computers running on the blockchain, we do not impose those rules; the point of the blockchain is that every node can talk to it at the same time and reach some consensus as to what the "meeting minutes" are and what the "company state" is. This is no easy task, and tackling it requires the integration of the numerous technologies aforementioned. The scenario is further complicated when we consider the possibility that some people on the call want to misinform others, invalidate or obscure legitimate information.

Having this immutable ledger replicated across personal computers in a network is really awesome though (once we have it). The ledger yields an auditable trail of transactions, which can be used to verify any number of historical transactions and, in many cases, the values of digital assets. This is a big reason why blockchain has found a home in finance; it systemizes and ideally secures the accounting process. But blockchain technology is not limited to finance and cryptocurrencies.

###Blockchain in public services
The blockchain redefines what a database is; how it is established and operated. Today, most big companies and governments manage their own server systems, through which they provide digital services, run user applications, receive and store data. When you log onto Facebook, you are sending an HTTPS request through your web browser to a Facebook server somewhere. Server operations check that your credentials are valid and then send an HTTPS response back to you. You receive the response in your browser, and you can see your news feed, check your notifications and messages, etc.

While this explanation neglects many of the finer details, it illustrates that we do not (usually) interact directly with databases. Rather, we send information to a server center, managed by some administrative entity. The server retrieves data from a database, possibly alters or performs computation on it, and sends it back to us in some fashion. This is no indictment of practice; however, the point remains that a single administrative entity regulates access to, management and distribution of data. Personally, you may be happy that developers and engineers at Facebook handle these issues: a company with talented personnel, a lot of money and computing power running its own centralized server system is better able to manage and deliver services. But what if the entity managing the server system is untrustworthy or incompetent? Forget about the reputation of the administrative entity- what if you are trying to prove that a digital asset is worth some amount of mone. This is something which you might like confirmation from other parties (e.g. market participants), even if the administrative entity (e.g. the bank) is reputable. But even the most "reputable" institutions are capable of corruption, fraud, and the like. 

Consider another scenario in which you submit a digital complaint one day and query the complaint form at a later date. The administrative entity claims it does not have the complaint form in its database- for whatever reason, it was lost or deleted. Either way, there is no traceable evidence that you submitted the complaint on that given day. You could easily submit another complaint, but you wonder whether that complaint will be lost or deleted too, and you question the responsiveness and general ethos of the administrative entity. I will revisit this topic, which lies at the intersection of decentralized technology and public services, in the following section.

City governments also have servers and databases. Of course, these systems provide different services and store different data than those managed by Facebook. Nevertheless, we have a similar plot line: an administrative entity regulates access to, management and distribution of data. In the past several years, there has been a push in many U.S. cities to collect more public data and make it available to constituencies. Even when data is collected, there isn’t always the digital infrastructure necessary to make the data accessible. When the infrastructure is in place, packaging and providing data is still a difficult process. It might be months or years before the government makes data from this year publicly available. 

I currently reside in the Chicagoland area. Chicago has a strong civic tech/social innovation scene and one of the better open data portals. The portal has historical data on many different things- properties, crime rates, police activity, traffic violations- which one can download or access through an API. While the open data portal is a beneficial resource for local officials, organizations, developers, and constituents, I believe a public service application built around a decentralized database is an important next step for the civic tech-scape. Ideally, constituents and local officials would use the application to maintain information, which currently resides in city government servers and file cabinets, in a decentralized infrastructure. This would increase transparency, accessibility, and stakeholder-ship of public data.

###Introducing comit
Comit is a public service application wrapped around a decentralized database. Individuals using comit can view, submit, and search issues in their local area (issue types are TBD). When a constituent submits a form through the interface, it is appended to an immutable ledger, assuming the form contains necessary and valid information. Each form in the ledger has a unique ID, and individuals can query a form by its ID. In addition, individuals can search forms by issue type, location, time posted, and status (i.e. resolved or unresolved). 

Admins (e.g. local officials, community organizers TBD) have different permissions than users. They cannot submit forms but can resolve them by changing the form status (Note: local officials and organizers are also constituents; they can have regular accounts too!). Wait a second, how is this different from current systems if we still have admins with privileges? Managing a centralized server system, the city government has the ability to manipulate data. Deleting a service request here, altering information in a citizen complaint there, though we hope our local government doesn’t do these things. While admins can resolve forms under the comit system, they should not be able to manipulate data. When an admin resolves a form, nothing about the form changes, apart from its status. A user querying the form will see that the form has been resolved by the admin at the time of resolution. If the issue has not been resolved, according to one or more parties, they will have a canonical chronology of events to hash out the situation- constituent X submitted form at 10:09 am on Tuesday, admin Y resolved form at 2:35 pm on Wednesday, etc. 

The primary motivation of comit harkens back to the concept of the open data portal. It is that public data should be a communal resource. It should be something we all interact with and help to create. While open data portals are a great tool, the concept reinforces the notion that public data is something provided by the government to the constituent. This is often a good thing- enabling public access to information that would otherwise remain scattered, unorganized, or inaccessible to the constituent. The act of provision, however, implies the providing entity regulates access to, management and distribution of data. Trusting a singular entity, reputable or not, to manage a universe of data is a significant delegation of responsibility, especially when the data is used by thousands of individuals and when the data is itself sourced from the citizenry! Examples of this include 311 service requests, law enforcement complaints, and other submission forms. It seems roundabout to have constituents submit this information, city government store it in their databases and file cabinets, and then, at a later date, "provide it back" to constituencies via a digital portal. Comit seeks to faciliate cooperative development of public data between citizens and officials to ensure its quality and persistence on a decentralized infrastructure secured by a community of users rather than managed by a singular entity.  (Note: I will not address the security, or safety of the blockchain layer. This gets into the details of consensus science. If you are interested, I recommend reading [Tendermint's whitepaper](http://tendermint.com/docs/tendermint.pdf) and other resources on Byzantine Fault-Tolerant Proof-of-Stake algorithms such as PBFT).

What do I mean by persistence? Well, if you submit an issue today, what is the chance that it will be in the database tomorrow? In a week? What about in a year? Will it still have all the information you originally included? A big part of ensuring data persistence is mitigating data mutability, or reducing the degree to which the underlying data structures can be altered. Under the comit system, there is no authority that should be able to modify or redact form fields; admins are only authorized to resolve forms. In a sense, each valid form submitted by a constituent that makes it into the ledger is etched in stone. Why is this important? Many systems currently have extensive mutability of data, which opens a pandora’s box of code bugs and higher-level issues that can manifest in one of many ways (e.g. losing personal account information or digitally held funds for X users). By mitigating data mutability, we can hopefully prevent these issues from occurring.

Revisiting the core functionality of comit- constituents can (1) submit issues and (2) search for submitted forms. The former is nothing new, if we think of tele-digital 311 systems and citizens submitting written complaints. However, this process is, often times, lengthy and obstacle-ridden, with no assurance that a government employee will receive the information and respond accordingly. Comit establishes an infrastructure through which individuals can submit information while admins and other individuals can view submissions in real time. By making the submission process transparent- forms are displayed publicly in the feeds, and official- valid form submissions are added to an immutable log, comit changes the conditions surrounding issue submission, potentially affecting an administrative response. The latter, dynamic form querying, is a more novel concept. Sure, I can find historical 311 service requests in the Chicago open data portal. But my accessing the data hinges on whether/when the city government decides to provide it via the portal. That is, if another Chicagoan submits a 311 service request today, I cannot view the submission form until a later date. And the integrity of the data is ensured by government due dilligence, or that of a specific department as opposed to that of a decentralized network. To summarize, comit provides an interface through which constituents can readily submit issues (which they may already do) and everyone can dynamically query form submissions and view updates in the feeds. That is, comit streamlines the "write permissions" while expanding the "read permissions" of users.

What about the anonymity of constituents submitting issues? Will their names be attached to the forms? This poses problems, especially with sensitive and serious subject matter. Comit uses asymmetric key cryptography; an individual does not enter name or other personal information when submitting an issue. Rather, an individual creates an account and receives public and private keys. A constituent enters both keys into the interface to log in. If the key credentials are valid, the constituent is redirected to the form submission page. When the constituent submits a form, the public key is used to fetch the user account, and the transaction, which includes form information and the public key, is signed with the private key. The signed transaction is then verified against the user account, a form is created and appended to the ledger. The created form does not include the private key and may or may not include the constituent's public key. The point is, valid key credentials are necessary to log in and create the form; however, the public key identifier need not be included in the form. Of course, some issues will need a public key identifier (e.g. if the consituent wants some form of compensation, information, etc.).

Comit is still very much in the works, but hopefully this primer has given you a taste of decentralized data systems, the potential they have to offer public services, and the ways in which comit is seeking to embody and employ these methods in practice. I will continue to explore different options for improving comit. In the meantime, I welcome input and feedback!

